---
layout: essay
type: essay
image: 
title: Coding Standards
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2019-02-06
labels:
  - Coding Standards
  - IDE Plugins
---


	
	[ jumbled punctuation quote]

Despite being a famed quote from a literary masterpiece, reading the above passage was probably a bit painful.  The reason is probably just as obvious - wonky punctuation; that is, I rewrote the passage without adhering to the English standards of punctuation.  Considering the above passage, it is clear why punctuation is standardized for written language.  What may be less clear, is why the need for punctuation in written languages is echoed by programming languages.  This visualization might help:
```
Poor standard code
```
```
Good standard code
```
Guidelines, or rules that dictate how code should be formatted are known as “coding standards.”  Similar to good literature that has been improperly punctuated, code that doesn’t adhere to basic standards is near illegible.  Also similar to punctuation, coding standards can be relatively loose.  That is to say, an author or coder may adapt a certain style of their own.  As code goes, it may seem fine enough as long as the compiler can piece it together and function appropriately; but not adhering to some type of standard - even just an internal one - will eventually be cause for confusion.  When coding, a program rarely comes together in the first try - debugging is a matter of course for a coder.  And it is while debugging and reviewing code that the benefits of coding standards really become evident.  Namely, it is a matter of readability.  Familiarity with a standard means knowing when and where code elements should be; in turn making it much simpler for any coder to spot potential errors or understand how code executes.

Over the past week I have been coding using the IntelliJ IDE (Integrated Development Environment) with ESLint - an automatic code inspection tool.  The advantage of tools like ESLint is that they inform the coder when their code is not up to the set standard.  The disadvantage is that becoming accustomed to one standard can make changing standards a bit tedious.  For instance, the coding standard I am using currently allows for significantly less ‘white’ space than previous coding standards I have used; and I often find myself removing blank lines before ESLint gives me the all-clear.  However, that blank lines are all I have to change is testament to the other benefit of coding standards.  They ingrain a certain technique and help a coder immediately recognize their mistakes - thus, no need to wait for the compiler to realize any minor mistakes.  Despite their usefulness, even the best coding standards can’t do always do much for flawed math or logic; but their ability to aid in the recognition of syntax errors frees up time for debugging more complicated problems. 

